The past has seen a significant increase in undue and fraudulent refunds claimed and paid out. These refunds paid negatively impacted the fiscus and resulted in the South African Revenue Service (‘SARS’) needing to take more action to ensure valid refunds are paid out. 

Fraudulent VAT refunds claimed 

Many syndicates were formed and registered a companies with VAT reference numbers and these companies were used to file incorrect VAT refund declarations to SARS and these refunds were sometime subject to verification or even auto released by the system. On the refunds flagged for verification, SARS will then be provided with the relevant ‘incorrect’ supporting documents and these will be reviewed, and refund will be released accordingly.  

SARS acted and tightened their risk engines to ensure that many VAT declarations submitted are verified for accuracy and validity thereon. Additional verification processes like third party confirmation of provided invoices and request for bank statements, management accounts or trail balance, to validate the vendor’s trade is for taxable supplies. SARS will further hold the refund in an instance that the vendor may have outstanding non-compliance issues across other tax types, non-submission of returns or outstanding tax debt. 

How to get your VAT refund paid 

Vendors that may have an outstanding VAT refund with SARS, it will be vital that they ensure that they are compliant with SARS across all tax types. If SARS has identified the relevant period for verification, the vendor will need to ensure that all the necessary tax invoices that are being claimed met the necessary requirements in terms of section 20(4) and (5) of the Value Added Tax Act. The vendor will need to comply with the verification request and supply all the requested information for a timeous review and completion thereon.  

In other cases, SARS may have finalised an audit on a specific period other than the refund period, and the audit has resulted in a payable. The system usually would set off the credit refund to the period where there is debt. This set off can not happen if the vendor has disputed the SARS assessment and submitted a request for suspension, which has been granted.  

Lastly, a vendor will need to ensure that the business banking details have been linked to the VAT tax product and be verified accordingly. The verified banking details can be verified on the vendor’s efiling on the SARS registered details, as this may also be the cause of the refund not paying out by the system.  

Conclusion 

SARS is utilising the AI advantage and improved audit processes to trace all susceptible fraudulent VAT refund claims. Major penalties will be imposed for those that try to claim incorrect VAT refunds but also with third party verifications, vendors that also have not filed the relevant output may be penalised for the omission of income. And in the near future, it may be expected that the different accounting software packages will need to be integrated unto the SARS system, providing third party data to confirm if the invoice has been issued and declared by the supplying vendor. 
